; Example 1:  Basics

; This file contains a fairly simple program written in the
; assembly language of xComputer.  It illustrates a few basic
; assembly language instructions and the format of assembly
; language programs.  (Note that a semicolon (;) and anything
; that follows it on a line is a comment.)

; The program computes the sum of a list of numbers.  The
; list can only contain non-zero numbers.  A zero marks
; the end of the list.  The list of numbers is at the end
; of this file.  They are actually treated by the computer
; as part of the program:  A number on a line by itself
; is simply stored in memory.  An instruction, on the
; other hand, is translated into a number that represents
; that instruction in machine language.  It is that
; number that is actually stored in memory.

; To run a program, click the "Translate" button that
; appears in the applet below the program.  The program will be
; translated into assembly language and the computer screen
; will reappear, with the program in its memory.  The
; program probably appears in the form of numbers, but you
; can change the way the contents of memory are displayed by
; selecting a view style from the pop-up menu that is
; above the scrolling memory display.

; Once the program is in memory, you can run it by clicking
; on the "Run" button.  There is a Speed pop-up menu for
; selecting the speed at which the program runs.  Alternatively,
; you can use the "Step" or "Cycle" button to move through
; the execution of the program manually.

; If you want to run the program a second time, you should
; first click on the "Set PC=0" button.  The PC tells the
; computer where to find its next instruction.  It has
; to be set to zero to point to the start of the program.

; Each of the following instructions has a comment that says
; what it does:

lod-c 30  ;  Load the constant 30 into the AC register.
sto 25    ;  Store the value (30) from AC into location 25.

lod-c 0   ; Load 0 into the AC.
sto 26    ; Store the 0 into location 26.

lod-i 25  ; The value in location 25 is an address of some
          ;    memory location.  Get the value from that
          ;    address and put it into the AC.  (The "i"
          ;    indicates what is called indirect addressing.)
          
jmz 12    ; If the value in the AC is zero (indicating 
          ;    end of the list of numbers) then jump
          ;    to location 12, where the program will halt.
          
add 26    ; Add the number in location 26 (the sum of the
          ;    previous numbers) to the AC (which contains
          ;    the next number from the list).
sto 26    ; Put the number from the AC into location 26.

lod 25    ; Load the number from location 25 into the AC.
inc       ; Add one to the number in the AC.
sto 25    ; Put the number from AC into location 25, so
          ;   location 25 now contains the location of the
          ;   next number in the list.

jmp 4     ; Jump to location 4, to get the next number
          ;    from the list.  NOTE:  Locations are numbered
          ;    starting from zero.
          
hlt       ; This is a halt instruction, which tells the
          ;    computer to stop execution.  (It is in
          ;    location number 12.)

@30  ; This is a special command that says that the following
     ; items are to be stored in memory starting "AT" location
     ; number 30.
     
26   ; These numbers will be in memory starting at
17   ;    location 30.  The computer will add them
-34  ;    and leave the answer in location 26
15
12
-23
-7
19
87
11
-73
21
0

